Eha (#85)
mlsa-book/MLSA: book/P1C5_eha.qmd

Nevertheless, competing risks are taken into account in the definition of the AJ estimator (@eq-aalen-johanson), as the all-cause survival probability (@eq-all-cause-surv-prob) depends on all cause-specific hazards.

In contrast, assume that in our analysis of the `sir.adm` data we would consider time of discharge as independent right-censoring.
As we only have one other event (death), the data could be treated as single-event, right-censored data as in @sec-surv and therefore analysed using the Nelson-Aalen estimator (@eq-nelson-aalen, @eq-surv-na).
The probability of death before some time-point $\tau$ could thus be obtained via $P(Y\leq \tau) = F(\tau) = 1 - S_{NA}(\tau)$.

@fig-cens-vs-cr shows the estimates obtained under the two assumptions.
Solid lines are identical to the right-hand side of @fig-cif-sir and indicate the probabilities under the competing risks assumption.
Dashed lines are obtained under the independent right-censoring assumption.

> Clearly, the probabilities of dying at time $\tau=120$ are overestimated when independent censoring is assumed ($\approx$ 75% vs. $\approx$ 25% in the pneumonia group and $\approx$ 62% vs. $\approx$ 13% in the no pneumonia group).

Author: why is it not overestimated?

|  1|    1|  0|     3|      0|   151|      0|Placebo    |
|  1|    1|  2|     4|      0|   151|      1|Placebo    |
|  8|    1|  0|     3|      0|   211|      1|Prednisone |
|  8|    1|  2|     4|      0|   211|      0|Prednisone |
|  8|    0|  1|     1|    211|  2770|      0|Prednisone |
|  8|    0|  2|     2|    211|  2770|      0|Prednisone |
| 46|    0|  1|     1|      0|   415|      1|Prednisone |
| 46|    0|  2|     2|      0|   415|      0|Prednisone |
| 46|    1|  0|     3|    415|   417|      0|Prednisone |
| 46|    1|  2|     4|    415|   417|      1|Prednisone |
: Subset of the `prothr` dataset [@pkgmstate]. {#tbl-ms-data-prothr}

### Notation and Definitions

Similar to competing risks (@sec-competing-risks), transitions between different states (see @fig-multi-state) are characterized by transition-specific hazards, denoted by $h_{\ell\rightarrow e}(\tau)$ or short $h_{\ell e}(\tau)$, where $\ell \in \mathcal{L}$ is the starting state and $e \in \mathcal{E}$ the end state, with $\mathcal{L}$ the set of possible starting states (transient states) and $\mathcal{E}$ the set of possible end states (transient and terminal states).

> Technically $e$ should depend on $\ell$, $e(\ell)$, as not all endpoints can be reached from a given starting state.

Reviewer: I see it's explained a little below but this threw me so much, do we need this sentence and the one below? I don't think we need to say "this notation is better but no-one uses so we won't either"

For example, in the right panel of @fig-multi-state $\ell \in \{0, 1, 2\}$ and $e(0) \in \{1, 3\}$, $e(1) \in \{0, 2, 3\}$ and $e(2) = \{1, 3\}$.
However, for notational convenience the difference between $\mathcal{L}$ and $\mathcal{E}$ as well as the dependency of $e$ on $\ell$ is often ignored  and we simply write $\ell, e \in \mathcal{E}$, where $\mathcal{E}= \{0,\ldots, q\}$ includes all possible states.

To formalise the multi-state setting further, let $E(\tau)\in \{0,\ldots,q\}$ the state occupied at time $\tau$.
Then, the transition specific hazard can be defined as
<!--  -->
$$
\begin{aligned}

> h_{\ell e}(\tau) &=  \lim_{\triangle \tau \to 0} \frac{P(\tau \leq Y < \tau + \triangle\tau, E(\tau + \triangle\tau)=e|Y \geq \tau, E(\tau-) = \ell)}{\triangle \tau}&\nonumber\\

Reviewer: Is E the random variable for e ? It's a little confusing because it's *similar* to notation for CR but then you redefine e \in \scriptE as the end state without explicitly saying CR is also an end state (though heavily implied above). So I'd probably just recap that E is the RV for e, although TBH I'm actually now confused again because E(tau) hasn't been defined (though I can guess its the event at time tau, in which case though don't you need to define e(tau)?)

>                  &         &\ e \neq \ell.\\

Reviewer: This rendering is confusing for me, maybe instead "the transition specific hazard can be defined for e \neq l as" ?

                 & =: \lim_{\triangle \tau \to 0} \frac{P(E(\tau + \triangle\tau)=e|E(\tau-) = \ell)}{\triangle \tau}&\nonumber
\end{aligned}
$$ {#eq-ms-transition-hazards}

> Transition hazards @eq-ms-transition-hazards indicate the relative risk to enter state $e$ at time $\tau$ given occupation of state $\ell$ in the instant before $\tau$ ($\tau-$).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transition hazards @eq-ms-transition-hazards indicate the relative risk to enter state $e$ at time $\tau$ given occupation of state $\ell$  at $\tau-$, which is the instant before $\tau$.
```

Analogous to the competing risks setting, we can define the transition specific cumulative hazards

$$
H_{\ell e}(\tau) = \int_{0}^{\tau}h_{\ell e}(u)du
$$ {#eq-ms-cumu-hazard}

> As in the competing risks setting, however, (cumulative) transition hazards don't tell the full story when absolute probabilities of transition are of interest.

Reviewer: Needs a rewrite, saying "as in however" is just confusing, is it the same or not?

The probability to transition from state $\ell$ to $e$ between two time-points depends on all transitions possible from $\ell$ and potentially the transitions that have taken place in the past.
Thus, other quantities of interest in the multi-state setting are the transition probabilities $P_{\ell e}(\zeta, \tau):= P(E(\tau) = e|E(\zeta) = \ell)$, that is the probability to transition from state $\ell$ to state $e$ between time points $\zeta < \tau$.
Implicitly, the above notation assumes that the process is Markovian, that is the probability only depends on the knowledge of the current state at time $\zeta$, not additional past of the process (although extensions that relax this assumption exist).
Transition probabilities of a multi-state process are often summarized in a quadratic matrix of transition probabilities
<!--  -->
$$
\mathbf{P}(\zeta, \tau):=
\begin{pmatrix}
  P_{00}(\zeta, \tau) & \cdots & P_{0q}(\zeta, \tau)\\
  \vdots & \ddots & \vdots\\
  P_{q0}(\zeta, \tau) & \cdots & P_{qq}(\zeta, \tau)\\
\end{pmatrix},
$$ {#eq-ms-trans-prob-mat}
<!--  -->
where rows indicate starting states and columns indicate end states.

> Some of the elements of $\mathbf{P}$ might be zero or one depending on the specific process, presence of absorbing states and possible pathways between states.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I don't think this adds anything here as you give an example below

<!--  -->
$$
\mathbf{P}(\zeta, \tau) =
  \begin{pmatrix}
  P_{00}(\zeta, \tau) & P_{01}(\zeta, \tau) & P_{02}(\zeta, \tau)\\
  0 & P_{11}(\zeta, \tau) & P_{12}(\zeta, \tau)\\
  0 & 0 & 1\\
  \end{pmatrix}
$$ {#eq-ms-trans-prob-mat-illness-death}
<!--  -->
So far, this is not very useful for estimation.
Thus, for now, assume that data is collected in discrete time, that is $\zeta, \tau \in \{0, 1, 2,\ldots\}, \zeta < \tau$ and transitions only occur at these discrete time points and not in between.
Say we are interested in transition probability $P_{02}(4, 6)$, that is the probability to transition from state $0$ to state $2$ between time points $\zeta=4$ and $\tau=6$, given we are in state $0$ at time $\zeta = 4$.

This is possible in three ways:

- stay in state $0$ at time $5$, transition to state $2$ at time $6$,
transition to state $1$ at time $5$, transition to state $2$ at time $6$, or
- transition to state $2$ directly at time $5$.

> Thus, $P_{02}(4,6) = p_{00}(5)p_{02}(6) + p_{01}(6)p_{12}(6) + p_{02}(5)$, where $p_{\ell e}(\tau)=P(E(\tau)=e|E(\tau -1) = \ell)$ are the probabilities for transitions $\ell \rightarrow e$ between two discrete time points.

Reviewer: This might be dumbing it down too much (but perhaps not) but maybe include p_22(6)

Reviewer: I find myself flicking between the definitions of P_le(tau,zeta) and p_le(tau). I think keeping them closer together could help

Thus, in discrete time, the matrix of transition probabilities can be represented as a finite matrix product (not element wise product)

$$
\mathbf{P}(\zeta, \tau) = \prod_{j =\zeta+1}^{\tau}
\begin{pmatrix}
  p_{00}(j) & p_{01}(j) & p_{02}(j)\\
  0 & p_{11}(j) & p_{12}(j)\\
  0 & 0 & 1\\
  \end{pmatrix}.

> $$ {#eq-ms-trans-prob-ill-death-discrete}

Reviewer: Yeah so this goes from being concrete to abstract then concrete again. If this was higher, next to P, then it would be easier to show the relation between P_xy and p_xy. *then* move on to the example

> For the concrete example we thus have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FIXME: FORMATTING

For the concrete example we thus have
```

Low priority, can do when copyediting

\end{pmatrix},
\end{aligned}
$$

where the quantity of interest, $P_{02}(4, 6)$ is given in the top right corner, but other transition probabilities are also readily available. For example, the probability to transition from state $1$ to $2$ between time points $\zeta=4$ and $\tau=6$ is given as $P_{12}(4, 6) = p_{11}(5)p_{12}(6) + p_{12}(5)$.

Returning to the continuous time setting where transitions can occur at any time point, ideas from the discrete time setting still hold.
Imagine dividing the interval $(\zeta, \tau]$ into $J$ intervals such that $\zeta = t_{0} < t_{1} < \cdots < t_{j} < \cdots t_{J} = \tau$, assuming that no events occur between time points $t_{j} \in \mathbb{R}_+, j=1,\ldots, J$.
Then @eq-ms-trans-prob-ill-death-discrete still holds when replacing $p_{\ell e}(j)$ with $p_{\ell e}(t_j)$.
Increasing the number of intervals to infinity or equivalently, reducing the interval size to infinitesimally small intervals $du$ where only one transition can be observed, leads to a product integral of instantaneous transition probabilities $p_{\ell e}(u) = P(E(u+du) = e|E(u-)=\ell)$, such that
<!--  -->
$$
\begin{aligned}

> \mathbf{P}(\zeta, \tau) & = \Prodi_{u \in (\zeta, \tau]}

Reviewer: Prodi doesn't render, what is it meant to show? Prod?

    p_{q0}(u) = : dH_{q0}(u)     & \cdots & p_{qq}(u) = :1 + dH_{qq}(u)\\
  \end{pmatrix}\nonumber\\
  & \ \\
  & =  \Prodi_{u \in (\zeta,\tau]}(\mathbf{I} + d\mathbf{H}(u)),\nonumber\\
\end{aligned}
$$ {#eq-ms-prodint-cumu-hazards}
<!--  -->
where $\mathbf{I}$ is a $(q+1) \times (q+1)$ identity matrix and $d\mathbf{H}(u)$ is the matrix of increments of the cumulative hazard within infinitesimally small intervals.
Thus, similar to the competing risks setting, relationship @eq-ms-prodint implies that knowledge of the transition specific (cumulative) hazards is sufficient to fully specify the multi-state process.

As analytical solutions of @eq-ms-prodint only exist for specific models, in practice, the transition probabilities are often once again approximated numerically via a finite matrix product on a discrete time grid $\zeta = t_0 < t_1 < \cdots < t_{J-1} < t_{J} = \tau$
<!--  -->
$$
\mathbf{P}(\zeta, \tau) \approx \prod_{j=1}^{J}(\mathbf{I} + \Delta\mathbf{H}_{\ell e}(t_{j})),
$$ {#eq-ms-prodint-approx}
<!--  -->
where $\triangle H_{\ell e}(t_{j}) = H_{\ell e}(t_{j}) - H_{\ell e}(t_{j-1})$ is the increment of the cumulative hazards between to consecutive time points.

> ### Aalen-Johanson Estimator for Transition Probabilities {#sec-ms-aalen-johanson}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Estimating Transition Probabilities {#sec-ms-aalen-johanson}
```

> Per @eq-ms-prodint-approx all we need for estimation of transition probabilities is an estimate of the transition specific cumulative hazards $H_{\ell e}(\tau)$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From @eq-ms-prodint-approx, it follows that transition probabilities can be estimated by first computing the transition-specific cumulative hazards, $H_{\ell e}(\tau)$.
```

To discuss today: in-line equation references

> Luckily, similar consideration as for competing risks in @sec-aalen-johanson apply, replacing the cause-specific hazards (@eq-cs-discrete-hazard) with transition-specific hazards

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly to the competing risks setting (@sec-aalen-johanson), the Aalen-Johanson estimator can be used by substituting the cause-specific hazards (@eq-cs-discrete-hazard) with the transition-specific hazards:
```

<!--  -->
$$
h^{d}_{\ell e}(t_{(k)}):= \frac{d_{\ell e,t_{(k)}}}{n_{\ell; t_{(k)}}},
$$
<!--  -->
where

> - $d_{\ell e,t_{(k)}}$ is now the number of observations with transition $\ell \rightarrow e$ at time $t_{(k)}$ and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- $d_{\ell e,t_{(k)}}$ is the number of observations with transition $\ell \rightarrow e$ at time $t_{(k)}$ and
```

- $n_{\ell; t_{(k)}} = |\mathcal{R}_{\ell;t_{(k)}}|$ is the number of subjects in state $\ell$ at time $t_{(k)}$.

> Thus, risk set $\mathcal{R}_{\ell;t_{(k)}}$ excludes subjects who entered a terminal state or were censored before time $t_{(k)}$, but also subjects who are not in state $\ell$ at that time (either because they did not reach it yet or transition to another state occurred beforehand).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus, the risk set $\mathcal{R}_{\ell;t_{(k)}}$ excludes any subjects not in state $\ell$ at that time, meaning those subjects at time $t_{(k)}$ that : 1) did not reach the state by that time; 2) already transitioned to another state; 3) entered a terminal state; or 4) have been censored.
```

I think given this new phrasing (3) and (4) aren't really necessary because they're special cases of state (2). Having said that, someone could reach the state and transition to another state then back to the same state, which means someone can be both case (1) and (2). Therefore I actually think the clarification doesn't help. It might be clearer to be super simple:

```suggestion
Thus, the risk set $\mathcal{R}_{\ell;t_{(k)}}$ is interpreted as 'subjects at risk of experiencing a transition from $\ell$ at time $t_{(k)}$'.
An event is then interpreted as 'subjects that transition from state $\ell$ to $e$'.
```

Happy for you to rephrase however but what I think is missing is the lay explanation of what this represents, then the part about exclusion isn't really necessary

The cumulative transition-specific hazards thereby follow as
<!--  -->
$$

> H_{NA,\ell e}(\tau) = \sum_{k:t_{(k)}\leq \tau} h^d_{\ell e}(t_{(k)}) = \sum_{k:t_{(k)}\leq \tau}\frac{d_{\ell e,t_{(k)}}}{n_{\ell; t_{(k)}}},

Reviewer: Arguably you don't need the far RHS because it's just been stated in the equation above and by now readers will be very used to seeing this format (i.e., H = sum h = sum d/n)

$$
<!--  -->

and transition probabilities are obtained via @eq-ms-prodint-approx as
<!--  -->
$$
\hat{\mathbf{P}}(\zeta, \tau) \approx \prod_{j=1}^{J}(\mathbf{I} + \Delta\hat{\mathbf{H}}_{NA,\ell e}(t_{(j)})),
$$ {#eq-ms-aj-trans-prob}
<!--  -->

> For illustration, consider again the `prothr` data set (@tbl-ms-data-prothr), with possible transitions summarized in @fig-multi-state-prothr-states.

Reviewer: Slightly more lead-in to the example would be good. Kind of abruptly jumps at the moment

In contrast to the illness-death model in @fig-multi-state, back transitions are possible and some subjects already start in the "abnormal" state at the beginning of the study.

![Transition graph for the liver cirrhosis patients.](Figures/survival/multi-state-prothr-states.png){#fig-multi-state-prothr-states fig-alt="Transition probabilities for the prothrombin data example."}

> Figure @fig-multi-state-prothr shows the transition probabilities for the four possible transitions over time for subjects who received treatment and placebo, respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
@fig-multi-state-prothr shows the transition probabilities for the four possible transitions over time for subjects who received treatment and placebo, respectively.
```

> In this example back-transitions are possible, therefore, in contrast to the cumulative incidence functions in the competing risks setting, transition probabilities (to transient states) are not monotonously increasing over time.

Reviewer: Hm this feels slightly off to me because CIF is a CDF type function that is monotonously increasing by definition whereas transition probabilities is a vector of probabilities over time so there's no intuitive reason why they'd ever be monotonically increasing/decreasing? LMK if i misunderstood

Reviewer: I think the other thing, similar to my comment above, is if we should also plot H or S? I think the concern could be that we've essentially introduced a very fundamentally different paradigm so even if it's usually modelled with P, if you've shown equation H_NA,le then surely it follows you can get S_NA,le -- would plotting that be interesting? Personally I'd be interested in knowing the probability of surviving one transition to the next, but if that's abnormal then ignore me!
